The Project Gutenberg eBook, Graf von Loeben and the Legend of Lorelei, by
Allen Wilson Porterfield


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Graf von Loeben and the Legend of Lorelei

Author: Allen Wilson Porterfield

Release Date: February 12, 2004  [eBook #11066]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRAF VON LOEBEN AND THE LEGEND OF
LORELEI***


Produced by the Project Gutenberg Distributed Proofreaders¥
in the occasion of the birth of Lorelei Kay Lynn Hutchinson.

The images were generously made available by the Bibliotheque
nationale de France (BnF/Gallica)
at http://gallica.bnf.fr/scripts/ConsultationTout.exe?O=N061319





Modern Philology

VOLUME XIII     October 1915     NUMBER 6     (pp. 65-92)



ALLEN WILSON PORTERFIELD

GRAF VON LOEBEN AND THE LEGEND OF LORELEI




I


The devotees of Apollo have to give a good account of themselves in
Olympia before, they can become _persona grata_ on Olympus. They spend
their lives, more or less, at the various games of poetry. Some, like
Goethe, win in the majority of trials, and then we study all of their
records regardless of their individual excellence. Some like Immermann
in _Oberhof_, win only once, but this is sufficient to insure
immortality. Some play and joust, run and wrestle with constancy and
grace; their records, just after starting and just before finishing,
are interesting, but in the end they are always defeated. And when
this is the case, posterity, lay and initiated, forgets their names
and concerns itself in no wise with their records, unless it be for
statistical purposes. It is to the latter class that Graf von
Loeben[1] belongs. For twenty-five years he was a perpetual,
loyal, chivalric contestant in the Olympic vale of poetry. His running
was interesting, but he never won; he never wrote a single thing that
everybody still reads for its own sake.

Aside from his connection with the Lorelei-matter, Graf von Loeben is,
therefore, at present, a wholly obscure, indeed unknown, Poet. The
large _Konversations-Lexikons_[2] of Meyer and Brockhaus say nothing
about him, unless it be in the discussion of some other poet with whom
he associated. Of the twenty best-known histories of German
literature, some of which treat nothing but the nineteenth century,
only six contain his name, and these simply mention him either as a
member of the Dresden group of pseudo-romanticists, or as one of those
_Afterromantiker_ who did yeoman service by way of bringing real
romanticism into disrepute through their unsubstantial, imitative, and
formless works. And this is true despite the fact that Loeben was an
exceedingly prolific writer and a very popular and influential man in.
his day. Concerning his personality, Muncker says: "Die Tiefe und
WAerme seines leicht erregbaren GemUethes, seine Herzensreinheit, seine
schwAermerische Hingabe an alles SchOene und Edle sowie sein zartes
TactgefUehl erwarben ihm bei Freunden und Bekannten das Lob einer
schOenen Seele in des Wortes schOenster Bedeutung."[3]

As to his poetic ability from the point of view of quantity, one can
only marvel at the amount he produced in the time at his disposal; his
creative works cover all types and sorts of literature.[4] He is best
known for his numerous poems and his _magnus opus_, _Guido_, a novel
of 360 pages, written under the pen-name of "Isidorus Orientalis," and
intended as a continuation of Novalis' _Ofterdingen_; he used Tieck's
notes for this purpose. He wrote also a great number of letters,
between 60 and 70 elaborate reviews, and some critical essays, the
best of which seems to be his commentary to Madame de Stael's _De
l'Allemagne_, while he translated from Anacreon, Dante, Guarini,
Horace, Ovid, Petrarch, Vergil, and others, and left a number of
fragments including the outline of a pretentious novel of which
Heinrich von Veldeke, whom he looked upon as "der Heilige des
Enthusiasmus," was to be the hero. And he was, incidentally, an
omnivorous reader, for, as he naively said:

    Viele BUecher muss ich kennen,
    Denn die Menschen kenn' ich gern.[5]

As to his originality, another confession is significant:

    Ja, es gibt nur wenig Leute,
    Deren SchUeler ich nicht bin.[6]

No attempt, however, has as yet been made at even an eclectic edition
of his numerous finished works, a few of which are still unpublished,
many of which are now rare.[7]

As to his standing with his literary contemporaries, Eichendorff
admitted[8] that Loeben influenced him as a man and as a poet; it was
he who induced Eichendorff to write some of his earlier works under
the pen-name of "Florens." And Eichendorff in turn credited Goethe
with the remark[9] that "Loeben war der vorzUeglichste Dichter jener
Zeit." His influence on Platen[10] is not quite so certain; Loeben was
Platen's senior by ten years, and they resembled each other in their
ability to employ difficult verse and strophe forms, and Platen read
Loeben in 1824. Kleist interested himself in Loeben sufficiently to
publish one of his short stories in his _AbendblAetter_, but only after
he had so thoroughly revised it that Reinhold Steig says: "Ich wUerde
als Herausgeber die ErzAehlung sogar unter Kleists _Parerga_
aufnehmen."[11] His connection with, and influence upon, the Dresden
group of romanticists, including Tieck, is a matter of record,[12] and
Fouque looked upon him as a poet of uncommon ability.[13]

But let no one on this account believe that Loeben was a great poet
and that the silence concerning him is therefore grimly unjust.
Goethe, whether he made the foregoing remark or not, at least
received[14] Loeben kindly; but he received others in the same way who
were not poets at all. Eichendorff said: "Loeben. Wunderbar poetische
Natur in stiller VerklAerung."[15] But Eichendorff was then only
nineteen years old, and he later took this back. Herder was moved to
tears[16] on reading Loeben's _Maria_, but Herder was easily moved,
and he died soon after; he would in all probability have changed his
mind too. Friedrich Schlegel, on the other hand, was not justified in
calling[17] the pastoral poems in _Arkadien_ "Schafpoesie." Uhland
praised[18] these same poems; but he reminded Loeben in no uncertain
terms, that the chief characteristic of southern poetry was
"Phantasie," while that of the northern poets was "GemUeth," and that
the attempt to revive the spirit of Guarini, Cervantes, and their kind
was not well taken.

That Loeben has been so totally neglected by historians and
encyclopedists is simply a case of that disproportion that so
frequently characterizes general treatises. Loeben is entitled to some
space in large works on German literature; but he was, like many
another who has been given space, a weak poet. And the sort of
weakness, with which he was endowed can be brought out by a discussion
of two of his novelettes, _Das weisse Ross,_[19] and _Leda,_ neither
of which is by any means his best work, and neither of which seems to
be his worst. But, to judge from what has been said of his prose works
in general, both are quite typical.

The plot so far as the action[20] is concerned is as follows: Otto
owes the victory he won at a tournament in NUernberg largely to the
beauty and agility of his great white horse Bellerophon. Siegenot von
der Aue had seen him and his horse perform and determined to obtain
Bellerophon, if possible, for, owing to a curse pronounced on his
family by a remote ancestor, Siegenot must either win at the next
tournament or become a monk, which he does not wish to do. Both he and
Otto love Felicitas, the niece of Graf Berthald. Siegenot secures
Bellerophon, is victorious at the tournament, though seriously
wounded, and is nursed back to health by Otto and Felicitas. It is
Otto, however, who wins Felicitas through his chivalric treatment of
his rival. The two are married, while Siegenot rides away on the great
white horse Bellerophon.

It is such creations that make us turn away from Loeben. Alas for
German romanticism if this story were wholly typical of it! It
contains the traditional conceits of the orthodox romanticists, but
applied in such a sweet, lovely, pretty fashion! One woman is placed
between two men, for in that way Loeben could best bring out his
philosophy of friendship. The only change, it seems, that he ever made
in this arrangement was to place one man between two women. The
sick-bed is poetized as the cradle of knowledge, for in it, or on it,
we become introspective and learn life. Old chronicles, tournaments,
jewelry, precious stones, Maryism, nature from every conceivable point
of view, dreams and premonitions, visions and hallucinations, religion
of the renunciatory type, the pain that clarifies, the friendship that
weeps, Catholic painting and lute music, and love--human and
divine--these are the main themes in this tale. Lyrics and episodic
stories are interpolated, obsolete words and stylistic archaisms
occur. In short, the novelette reads like an amalgamation of Novalis
without his philosophy, Waekenroder without his suggestiveness, and
Tieck without his constructive ability.

The story[21] entitled Leda is again typical of Loeben. Briefly
stated, the plot is as follows: Leda, the daughter of a Roman duke,
loves Cephalo, who is a gentleman but not a nobleman, and is loved by
him. Her father, however, has forced her to become engaged to Alberto,
a man of high degree, whom she does not love. The wedding is imminent,
and Leda is sorely perplexed. Her father does not know why she is so
indifferent to the approaching event and accordingly sends her to a
distant and lonely castle in the hope that she may become interested,
at least, in her own nuptials. While there she drowns herself in the
swan lake. Alberto drops out of the story, and Cephalo becomes the
intimate friend of the duke. Previous to this Alberto had ordered a
certain painter to paint a picture of "Leda and the Swan." Danae, the
daughter of an old, unscrupulous antiquarian, was seen by Cephalo
while posing as a model for Leda. Enraged at this, she tells her
father that she will not be appeased until married to Cephalo. But she
loses her life through the falling of an old, dilapidated castle
wherein she has been keeping an unconventional tryst, and Cephalo
becomes the intimate friend of the painter.

Loeben's ideas and technique stand out in every line of this story.
One woman is placed between two men, unexpected friendships are
developed, the lute and the zither are played in the moonlight, love
and longing abound, nature is made a confidant, _der Zaubern der
Kunst_ is overdone, familiar stories--Leda and the Swan, Actaeon and
Danae--are interwoven, there are manifest reminiscences of _Emilia
Galotti_ and _Ofterdingen_, and the prose is uncommonly fluent. The
only character in the entire narrative who has any virility is the
antiquarian, and he is one of the meanest Loeben ever drew. Alberto
has no will at all, Leda not much, Cephalo less than Leda, and Danae
is without character. In short, the only valuable, part of the story
lies in its approach to a development of the psychology of love in
art. But it is only an approach; and it does not make one feel
inclined to read a vast deal more of the prose works of Graf von
Loeben.

As to Loeben's lyrics,[22] they are irregular, inconsistent, and odd
as to orthography,[23] melodious and flowing in form, poor in ideas,
rich in feeling that frequently sounds forced, representative of
nearly all the important Germanic, Romance, and Oriental verse and
strophe forms, reminiscent of his reading[24] in many instances, and
romantic as a whole, especially in their constant portrayal of
longing. Loeben was the poet of _Sehnsucht_. He tried always _das Nahe
zu entfernen und das Ferne sich nahe zu bringen_. With a few
conspicuous exceptions, his lyrics resemble those of Geibel somewhat
in form and treatment. Poetry and individual poets receive grateful
consideration, the seasons are overworked, love rarely fails and
nature never, wine and the Rhine are not forgotten, and the South is
poetized as the land of undying inspiration. Of their kind, and in
their way, Loeben's poems are nearly perfect.[25] There are no
expressions that repel, no verses that jar, no poems that wholly lack
fancy, and there are occasional evidences of the inspiration that
rebounds. It would be presumptuous to ask for a more amiable poem than
"FrUehlingstrost" (46), or for a neater one than "Der NichterhOerte"
(121), or for a more gently roguish one than the triolett[26] entitled
"Frage" (55).

But be his poems never so good, there is no reason why Loeben should
be revived for the general reader. His prose works lack artistic
measure and objective plausibility; his lyrics lack clarity and
virility; his creations in general lack the story-telling property
that holds attention and the human-interest touches that move the
soul. His thirty-nine years were too empty of real experience;[27] his
works are not filled with the matter that endures. And it is for this
reason that they ceased to live after their author had died. His
connection with this earth was always just at the snapping-point. His
works constitute, in many instances, a poetic rearrangement of what he
had just latterly read. And when he is original he is vacuous. To
emphasize his works for their own sake would consequently be to set up
false values. Loeben can be studied with profit only by those people
who believe that great poets can be better understood and appreciated
by a study of the literary than by a study of the economic background.
To know Loeben[28] throws light on some of his much greater
contemporaries--Goethe, Eichendorff, Kleist, Novalis, Arnim, Brentano,
Uhland, GOerres, Tieck, and possibly Heine.




II


But it is not so much the purpose of this paper to evaluate Loeben's
creations as to locate him in the development of the Lorelei-legend,
and to prove, or disprove, Heine's indebtedness to him in the case of
his own poem of like name. The facts are these:

In 1801 Clemens Brentano published at Bremen the first volume of his
__Godwi_ and in 1802 the second volume at the same place.[29] He had
finished the novel early in 1799--he was then twenty-one years old.
Wieland was instrumental in securing a publisher.[30] Near the close
of the second volume, Violette sings the song beginning:

    Zu Bacharach am Rheine
    Wohnt eine Zauberin.

That this now well-known ballad of the Lorelei was invented by
Brentano is proved, not so much by his own statement to that effect as
by the fact that the erudite and diligent Grimm brothers, the friends
of Brentano, did not include the Lorelei-legend in their collection of
_579 Deutsche Sagen_, 1816. The name of his heroine Brentano took from
the famous echo-rock near St. Goar, with which locality he became
thoroughly familiar during the years 1780-89. No romanticist knew the
Rhine better or loved it more than Brentano. "Lore" means[31] a small,
squinting elf; and is connected with the verb "lauern." The oldest
form of the word is found in the _Codex Annales Fuldenses_, which goes
back to the year 858, and was first applied to the region around the
modern Kempten near Bingen. "Lei" means a rock; "Loreley" means then
"Elbfels." And what Brentano and his followers have done is to apply
the name of a place to a person.

In _Urania: Taschenbuch auf das Jahr 1821_, Graf von Loebcn published
his "Loreley: Eine Sage vom Rhein." The following ballad introduces
the saga in prose. Heine's ballad is set opposite for the sake of
comparison.[32]

  Da wo der Mondschein blitzet         Ich weiss nicht, was soll es bedeuten
  Um's hOechste Felsgestein,            Dass ich so traurig bin;
  Das ZauberfrAeulein sitzet            Ein MAerchen aus alten Zeiten,
  Und schauet auf den Rhein.           Das kommt mir nicht aus dem Sinn.

  Es schauet herUeber, hinUeber,         Die Luft ist kUehl und es dunkelt,
  Es schauet hinab, hinauf,            Und ruhig fliesst der Rhein;
  Die Schifflein ziehn vorUeber,        Der Gipfel des Berges funkelt
  Lieb' Knabe, sieh nicht auf!         Im Abendsonnenschein.

  Sie singt dir hold zum Ohre,         Die schOenste Jungfrau sitzet
  Sie blickt dich thOericht an,         Dort oben wunderbar,
  Sie ist die schOene Lore,             Ihr goldenes Geschmeide blitzet,
  Sie hat dir's angethan.              Sie kAemmt ihr goldenes Haar.

  Sie schaut wohl nach dem Rheine,     Sie kAemmt es mit goldenem Kamme,
  Als schaute sie nach dir,            Und singt ein Lied dabei;
  Glaub's nicht, dass sie dich meine,  Das hat eine wundersame
  Sich nicht, horch nicht nach ihr!    Gewaltige Melodei.

  So blickt sie wohl nach allen        Den Schiffer im kleinen Schiffe
  Mit ihrer Augen Glanz,               Ergreift es mit wildem Weh;
  LAesst her die Locken wallen          Er schaut nicht die Felsenriffe,
  Im wilden goldnen Tanz.              Er schaut nur hinauf in die HOeh'.

  Doch wogt in ihrem Blicke            Ich glaube, die Wellen verschlingen
  Nur blauer Wellen Spiel,             Am Ende Schiffer und Kahn;
  Drum scheu die WassertUecke,          Und das hat mit ihrem Singen
  Denn Flut bleibt falsch und kUehl!    Die Lorelei gethan.

The following saga then relates how an old hunter sings this song to a
young man in a boat on the Rhine, warning him against the allurements
of the Lorelei on the rock above. The hunter's good intentions are
fruitless, the young man is drowned.

In the autumn of 1823, Heine wrote, while at Luneburg, his "Die
Lorelei." It was first published[33] in the _Gesellschafter,_ March
26, 1824. Commentators refer to the verse, "Ein MAerchen aus alten
Zeiten," as a bit of fiction, adding that it is not a title of olden
times, but one invented by Brentano about 1800. The statement is true
but misleading, for we naturally infer that Heine derived his initial
inspiration from Brentano's ballad. Concerning this matter there are
three points of view: Some editors and historians point out Brentano's
priority and list his successors without committing[34] themselves as
to intervening influence. This has only bibliographical value and for
our purpose may be omitted. Some trace Heine's ballad direct to
Brentano, some direct to Loeben. Which of these two points of view has
the more argument in its favor and can there be still a third?

In the first place, Heine never knew Brentano personally, and never
mentions him in his letters previous to 1824, nor in his letters[35]
that have thus far been published after 1824. _Godwi_ was repudiated
soon after its publicatipn by Brentano himself, who said[36] there was
only one good thing about it, the title, for, after people had said
"Godwi," they could just keep on talking and say, "Godwi, dumm." On
its account, Caroline called him Demens Brentano, while Dorothea
dubbed him "Angebrenntano." The novel became a rare and unread book
until Anselm Ruest brought out a new edition[37] with a critical and
appreciative introduction in 1906. Diel and Kreiten say "es ging fast
spurlos vorUeber." It was not included in his _Gesammelte Schriften_
(1852-55), though the ballad[38] was. Heine does not mention it in his
_Romantische Schule_, which was, however, written ten years after he
had finished his "Die Lorelei." And as to the contents of Brentano's
ballad, there is precious little in it that resembles Heine's ballad,
aside from the name of the heroine, and even here the similarity is
far from striking.

And yet, despite all this, commentators continue to say that Heine
drew the initial inspiration for his "Lorelei" from Brentano. They may
be right, but no one of them has thus far produced any tenable
argument, to say nothing of positive proof. The most recent supporter
of Brentano's claim is Eduard Thorn[39] (1913), who reasons as
follows:

Heine knew Brentano's works in 1824, for in that year he borrowed
_Wunderhorn_ and _TrOesteinsamkeit_ from the library at GOettingen.
These have, however, nothing to do with Brentano's ballad, and it is
one year too late for Heine's ballad. All of Thorn's references to
Heine's _Romantische Schule_, wherein _Godwi_, incidentally, is not
mentioned, though other works are, collapse, for this was written ten
years too late. And then, to quote Thorn: "Loeben's Gedicht lieferte
das direkte Vorbild fUer Heine." He offers no proof except the
statements of Strodtmann, Hessel, and Elster to this effect.

And again: "Der Name Lorelay findet sich bei Loeben nicht als
Eigenname, wenn er auch das Gedicht, 'Der Lurleifels' Ueberschreibt."
But the name Loreley does occur[40] twice on the same page on which
the last strophe of the ballad is published in _Urania_, and here the
ballad is not entitled "Der Lurleifels," but simply "Loreley." Now,
even granting that Loeben entitled his ballad one way in the MS and
Brockhaus published it in another way in _Urania_, it is wholly
improbable that Heine saw Loeben's MS previous to 1823.

And then, after contending that Brentano's _RheinmAerchen_,[41] which,
though written before 1823, were not published until 1846, must have
given Heine the hair-combing motif, Thorn says: "Also kann nur
Brentano das Vorbild geliefert haben." This cannot be correct. What
is, on the contrary, at least possible is that Heine influenced
Brentano.[42] The _RheinmAerchen_ were finished, in first form, in
1816. And Guido GOerres, to whom Brentano willed them, and who first
published them, tells us how Brentano carried them around with him in
his satchel and changed them and polished them as opportunity was
offered and inspiration came. It is therefore reasonable to believe
that Heine helped Brentano to metamorphose his Lorelei of the ballad,
where she is wholly human, into the superhuman Lorelei of the
_RheinmAerchen_ where she does, as a matter of fact, comb her hair with
a golden comb.[43]

And now as to Loeben: Did Heine know and borrow from his ballad? Aside
from the few who do not commit themselves, and those who trace Heine's
poem direct to Brentano, and Oscar F. Walzel to be referred to later,
all commentators, so far as I have looked into the matter, say that he
did. Adolf Strodtmann said[44] it first (1868), in the following
words: "Es leidet wohl keinen Zweifel, dass Heine dies Loeben'sche
Ballade gekannt und bei Abfassung seiner Lorelei-Ballade benutzt hat."
But he produces no proof except similarity of form and content. Of the
others who have followed his lead, ten, for particular reasons, should
be authorities: Franz Muncker,[45] Karl Hessel,[46] Karl Goedeke,[47]
Wilhelm Scherer,[48] Georg MUecke,[49] Wilhelm Hertz,[50] Ernst
Elster,[51] Georg Brandes,[52] Heinrich Spiess,[53] and Herrn. Anders
KrUeger.[54] But no one of them offers any proof except Strodtmann's
statement to this effect.

Now their contention may be substantially correct; but their method of
contending is scientifically wrong. To accept, where verification is
necessary, the unverified statement of any man is wrong. And, that is
the case here. Elster's note is of peculiar interest. He says: "Heine
schloss sich am nAechsten an die Bearbeitung eines Stoffs an, die ein
Graf LOeben 1821 verOeffentlichte." The expression "ein Graf LOeben" is
grammatical evidence, though not proof, of one of two things: that
Loeben was to Elster himself in 1890 a mere name, or that Elster knew
Loeben would be this to the readers of his edition of Heine's works.
Brandes says: "Die Nachahmung ist unzweifelhaft."[55] His proof is
Strodtmann's statement, and similarity of content and form, with
special reference to the two rhymes "sitzet-blitzet" that occur in
both. But this was a very common rhyme with both Heine and Loeben in
other poems. How much importance can be attached then to similarity of
content and form?

The verse and strophe form, the rhyme scheme, the accent, the melody,
except for Heine's superiority, are the same in both. As to length,
the two poems are exactly equal, each containing, by an unimportant
but interesting coincidence, precisely 117 words.[56] But the contents
of the two poems are not nearly so similar as they apparently seemed,
at first blush, to Adolf Strodtmann. The melodious singing, the golden
hair and the golden comb and the use that is made of both, the
irresistibly sweet sadness, the time, "Aus alten Zeiten," and the
subjectivity--Heine himself recites his poem--these indispensable
essentials in Heine's poem are not in Loeben's. Indeed as to content
and of course as to merit, the two poems are far removed from each
other.

And, moreover, literary parallels are the ancestors of that undocile
child, Conjecture. We must remember that sirenic and echo poetry are
almost as old as the tide of the sea, certainly as old as the hills,
while as to the general situation, there is a passage in Milton's
_Comus_ (ll. 880-84) analogous to Heine's ballad, as follows:

    And fair Ligea's golden comb,
    Wherewith she sits on diamond rocks,
    Sleeking her soft alluring locks,
    By all the nymphs that nightly dance
    Upon thy streams with wily glance,

and so on. And as to the pronounced similarity of form, we must
remember that Heine was here employing his favorite measure, while
Loeben was almost the equal of Ruckert in regard to the number of
verse and strophe forms he effectively and easily controlled. In
short, striking similarity in content is lacking, and as to the same
sort of similarity in form to this but little if any significance can
be attached.

And if the internal evidence is thin, the external is invisible,
except for the fact that Loeben's ballad was published by Brockhaus,
whom Heine knew by correspondence. But between the years 1818 and
1847, Heine never published anything in _Urania_,[57] which was used
by so many of his contemporaries. Heine and Loeben never knew each
other personally, and between the years 1821 and 1823 they were never
regionally close together.[58] Heine never mentions Loeben in his
letters; nor does he refer to him in his creative works, despite the
fact that he had a habit of alluding to his brothers in Apollo, even
in his poems.[59]

And therefore, though it is fashionable to say that Heine knew
Loeben's ballad in 1823, and though the contention is plausible, it is
impossible to prove it. Impossible also for this reason: Karl Simrock,
Heine's intimate friend, included in his _Rheinsagen_ (1836, 1837,
1841)[60] the ballads on the Lorelei by Brentano, Eichendorff, Heine,
and himself. Why did he exclude the one by Loeben? He made an ardent
appeal in his preface to his colleagues to inform him of any other
ballads that had been written on these themes. The question must be
referred to those who like to skate on flabby ice in things literary.

The most plausible theory in regard to the source of Heine's ballad is
the one proposed by Oscar F. Walzel, who says: "Heine hat den Stoff
wahrscheinlich aus dem ihm wohlbekannten _Handbuch fUer Reisende am
Rhein_ von Aloys Schreiber Uebernommen."[61] The only proof that Walzel
gives that Heine knew Schreiber's manual is a reference[62] to it in
_Lutetia_. But this was written in 1843, and proves nothing as to
1823. His contention, however, that Heine borrowed from Schreiber[63]
has everything in its favor, from the point of view of both external
and internal evidence and deserves, therefore, detailed elaboration.

As to internal evidence, there is only one slight difference between
Heine's ballad and Schreiber's saga: where Heine's Lorelei combs her
hair with a golden comb and has golden jewelry, Schreiber's "bindet
einen Kranz fUer ihre goldenen Locken" and "hat eine Schnur von
Bernstein in der Hand." Even here the color scheme is the same;
otherwise there is no difference: time, place, and events are
precisely the same in both. The mood and style are especially similar.
The only words in Heine not found in Schreiber are "Kamm" and
"bedeuten." Schreiber goes, to be sure, farther than does Heine: he
continues the story after the death of the hero.[64] This, however, is
of no significance, for Heine was simply interested in his favorite
theme of unrequited or hindered love.

Now Heine must have derived his plot from somewhere, else this would
be an uncanny case of coincidence. And the two expressions, "Aus alten
Zeiten," and "Mit ihrem Singen," the latter of which is so important,
Heine could have derived only from Schreiber. Heine was not jesting
when he said it was a fairy tale from the days of old; he was
following, it seems, Schreiber's saga, the first sentence of which
reads as follows: "In alten Zeiten liess sich manchmal auf dem Lureloy
um die AbenddAemmerung und beym Mondschein eine Jungfrau sehen, die mit
so anmuthiger Stimme sang, dass alle, die es hOerten, davon bezaubert
wurden." But Brentano's Lorelei does not sing at all, and Loeben's
just a little, "Sie singt dir hold zum Ohre," while Heine, like
Schreiber, puts his heroine in the prima donna class, and has her work
her charms through her singing. And it seems that Heine was following
Schreiber when the latter wrote as follows: "Viele, die
vorUeberschifften, gingen am Felsenriff oder im Strudel zu Grunde, weil
sie nicht mehr auf den Lauf des Fahrzeugs achteten, sondern von den
himmlischen TOenen der wunderbaren Jungfrau gleichsam vom Leben
abgelOest wurden, wie das zarte Leben der Blume sich im sUessen Duft
verhaucht."

And as to her personal appearance, Brentano and Loeben simply tell us
that she was beautiful, Brentano employing the Homeric method of
proving her beauty by its effects. Heine and Schreiber not only
comment upon her physical beauty, they also tell us how she enhanced
her natural charms by zealously attending to her hair and her jewelry
and religiously guarding the color scheme in so doing. In brief, the
similarity is so striking that, if we can prove that Heine knew
Schreiber in 1823, we can definitely assert that Schreiber[65] was his
main, if not his unique, source.

Let us take up the various arguments in favor of the contention that
Heine knew Schreiber's Handbuch in 1823, beginning with the least
convincing. If Heine read Loeben's ballad and saga in "_Urania_ fUer
1821," he could thereby have learned also of Schreiber's _Rheinsagen_,
for, by a peculiar coincidence for our purpose, Brockhaus
discusses[66] these in the introduction in connection with a tragedy
by W. Usener, entitled Die BrUeder, and based upon one of Schreiber's
_Sagen_. Proof, then, that Heine knew Loeben in 1823 is almost proof
that he also knew Schreiber.

But there is better proof than this. In Elementargeister[67], we find
this sentence: "Ganz genau habe ich die Geschichte nicht im Kopfe;
wenn ich nicht irre, wird sie in Schreibers _Rheinischen Sagen_ aufs
umstAendlichste erzAehlt. Es ist die Sage vom Wisperthal, welches unweit
Lorch am Rheine gelegen ist." And then Heine tells the same story that
is told by Schreiber. It is the eighth of the seventeen _Sagen_ in
question. This, then, is proof that Heine knew Schreiber so long
before 1835 that he was no longer sure he could depend upon his
memory. But it is impossible to say whether Heine's memory was good
for twelve years, or more, or less.

But there is better evidence than this. Heine's _Der Rabbi von
Bacharach_ reaches far back into his life. That he intended to write
this sort of work before 1823 has been proved;[68] just when he
actually began to write this particular work is not so clear, but we
know that he did much preliminary reading by way of preparing himself
for its composition. And the region around and above and below
Bacharach comes in for detailed discussion and elaborate description
in Schreiber's _Rheinsagen_. The crusades, the _Sankt-Wernerskirchen_,
Lorch, the _Fischfang_, Hatto's _MAeuseturm_, the maelstrom at Bingen,
the _Kedrich_, the story of the _Kecker Reuter_ who liberated the maid
that had been abducted by dwarfs, and again, and this is irrefutable,
the story "von dem wunderlicheft Wisperthale drUeben, wo die VOegel ganz
vernUenftig sprechen," all of these and others play a large role in
Schreiber's sagas and in Heine's _Rabbi_. No one can read Schreiber's
_Handbuch_ and Heine's _Rabbi_ without being convinced that the former
stood sponsor for the latter.

And lastly, Heine wrote before 1821 his poem entitled "Die zwei
BrUeder."[69] It is the tenth of the seventeen _Volkssagen_ by
Schreiber, the same theme as the one treated by W. Usener already
referrred to. It is an old story,[70] and Heine could have derived his
material from a number of places, but not from Grimm's _Deutsche_
_Sagen_, indeed from no place so convenient as Schreiber. Heine knew
Schreiber's _Handbuch_[71] in 1823.

The situation, then, is as follows: Heine had to have a source or
sources, There are three candidates for Heine honors; Brentano,
Loeben, Schreiber. Brentano has a number of supporters, though the
evidence, external and internal, is wholly lacking. It would seem that
lack of attention to chronology has misled investigators. Brentano's
ballad can now be read in many places, but between about 1815 and 1823
it was safely concealed in the pages of an unread and unknown novel.
Loeben[72] has many supporters, though the external evidence, except
for the fact that Heine corresponded with Brockhaus, is wholly
lacking, and the internal weakens on careful study. It would seem that
the striking similarity in form has misled investigators. Schreiber
has only one supporter, despite the fact that the evidence, external
and internal, is as strong as it can be without Heine's ever having
made some such remark as the following: "Yes, in 1823 I knew _only_
Schreiber's saga and borrowed from it." But Heine never made any such
statement. It would seem that the strong assertions of so many
investigators in favor of Brentano and Loeben have made careful study
of the matter appear not worth while; the problem was apparently
solved. And since Heine never committed himself in this connection,
the matter will, in all probability, remain forever conjectural. This
much, however, is irrefutable: even if Heine knew in 1823 the five
_Loreleidichtungen_, that had then been written, those by Brentano,
Niklas Vogt, Eichendorff, Schreiber, and Loeben, and if he borrowed
what he needed from all of them, he borrowed more from Schreiber[73]
than from the other four combined.[74]




III


Whore Brentano sowed, many have reaped. Since the publication of his
_Godwi_, about sixty-five _Loreleidichtungen_[75] have been written in
German, the most important being those by Brentano (1810-16), Niklas
Vogt[76] (1811), Eichendorff (_ca._ 1812), Loeben (1821), Heine
(1823), Simrock (1837, 1840), Otto Ludwig (1838), Geibel (1834, 1846),
W. MUeller von KOenigswinter (1851), Carmen Sylva, (_ca._ 1885), A.
L'Arronge (1886), Julius Wolff (1886), and Otto Roquette (1889). In
addition[77] to these, the story has been retold[78] many times, with
slight alterations of the "original" versions, by compilers of
chrestomathies, and parodies have been written on it. There is hardly
a conceivable interpretation that has not been placed upon the
legend.[79] The Lorelei has been made by some the evil spirit that
entices men into hazardous games of chance, by others, she is the
lofty incarnation of a desire to live and be blessed with the love
that knows no turning away. The story has also wandered to Italy,
France, England, Scotland, Scandinavia, and the United States,[80] and
the heroine has proved a grateful theme for painters and sculptors. Of
the epic works, that by Julius Wolff is of interest because of the
popularity it has enjoyed. First published in 1886, it had reached the
forty-sixth thousand in 1898. Of the dramas that by L'Arronge should
be valuable, but it has apparently never been published; nor has Otto
Ludwig's operatic fragment,[81] unless recently. Aside from Geibel,
Otto Roquette is the most interesting librettist. Of the forty-odd
(there were forty-two in 1898) composers of Heine's ballad, the
greatest are Schumann, Raff, and Liszt, and in this case Friedrich
Sucher,[82] who married the ballad to its now undivorceable melody.

Though Brentano created[83] the story of his ballad, he located it in
a region rich in legendary material, and it was the echo-motif of
which he made especial use, and traces of this can be found in German
literature as early as the thirteenth century.[84] The first real poet
to borrow from Brentano was Eichendorff,[85] in whose _Ahnung und
Gegenwart_ we have the poem since published separately under the title
of "WaldgesprAech," and familiar to many through Schumann's
composition.[86] That Eichendorff's Lorelei operates the forest is
only to be expected of the author of so many _Waldlieder_. Even if
Heine had known it he could have borrowed nothing from it except the
name of his heroine.[87]

As to Loeben's saga, there can be but little doubt that he derived his
initial inspiration from Schreiber, with whom he became intimately
acquainted[88] at Heidelberg during the winter of 1807-8. This, of
course, is not to say that Heine borrowed from Loeben. Indeed, one of
the strongest proofs that Heine borrowed from Schreiber rather than
from Loeben is the clarity and brevity, ease and poetry of Schreiber's
saga as over against the obscurity and diffuseness, clumsiness and
woodenness of Loeben's saga,[89] the plot of which, so far as the
action is concerned, is as follows: Hugbert von Stahleck, the son of
the Palsgrave, falls in love with the Lorelei and rows out in the
night to her seat by the Rhine. In landing, he falls into the stream,
the Lorelei dives after him and brings him to the surface. The old
Palsgrave has, in the meanwhile, sent a knight and two servants to
capture the Lorelei. They climb the lofty rock and hang a stone around
the enchantress' neck, when she voluntarily leaps from the cliff into
the Rhine below and is drowned.

The one episode in Loeben not found in any of Schreiber's _Rheinsagen_
is the story of the castaway ring miraculously restored from the
stomach of the fish. This Loeben could have taken from "Magelone" by
Tieck, or "Polykrates" by Schiller, both of whom he revered as men and
with whose works he was thoroughly familiar. But there is nothing in
Loeben that Heine could not have derived in more inspiring form from
Schreiber; and Schreiber contains essentials not in Loeben at all.
Indeed, a general study of Schreiber's manuals leads one to believe
that the influence of them, as a whole, on Heine would be a most
grateful theme: there is not one Germanic legend referred to in Heine
that is not contained in Schreiber. And as a prose writer, Heine's
fame rests largely on his travel pictures.[90]

The points of similarity between Loeben's ballad and saga and the
ballads and MAerchen of Brentano, all of which Loeben knew in 1821, are
wholly negligible. It remains,[91] therefore, simply to point out some
of the peculiarities of Brentano's "Loreley" as protrayed in the
_RheinmAerchen_--peculiarities that are interesting in themselves and
that may have played a part in the development of the legend since
1846.

In "Das MAerchen von dem Rhein und dem MUeller Radlauf,"[92] Loreley is
portrayed in a sevenfold capacity, as it were: seven archways lead to
seven doors that open onto seven stairways that lead to a large hall
in which Frau Lureley sits on a sevenfold throne with seven crowns
upon her head and her seven daughters around her. This makes
interesting reading for children, but Brentano did not lose sight of
adults, including those who like to speculate as to the origin of the
legend. He says: "Sie [Lorelei] ist eine Tochter der Phantasie,
welches eine berUehmte Eigenschaft ist, die bei Erschaffung der Welt
mitarbeitete und das Allerbeste dabei that; als sie unter der Arbeit
ein schOenes Lied sang, hOerte sie es immer wiederholen und fand endlich
den Wiederhall, einen schOenen JUengling in einem Felsen sitzen, mit dem
sie sich verheiratete und mit ihm die Frau Lureley erzeugte; sie
hatten auch noch viele andere Kinder, zum Beispiel: die Echo, den
Akkord, den Reim, deren Nachkommen sich noch auf der Welt
herumtreiben."

Just as Frau Lureley closes the first _MAerchen_, so does she begin the
second: "Von dem Hause Staarenberg und den Ahnen des MUellers
Radlauf."[93] Here she creates, or motivates, the other characters.
Her seven daughters appear with her, as follows: Herzeleid,
Liebesleid, Liebeseid, Liebesneid, Liebesfreud, Reu und Leid, and
Mildigkeit. She reappears then with her seven daughters at the close
of the _MAerchen_, and each sings a beautiful song, while Frau Lureley,
the mother of Radlauf, proves to be a most beneficent creature.
Imaginative as Brentano was, he rarely rose to such heights as in this
and the next, "MAerchen vom Murmelthier,"[94] in which Frau Lureley
continues her great work of love and kindness. She rights all wrongs,
rewards the just, corrects the unjust, and leads a most remarkable
life whether among the poor on land or in her element in the water.
All of which is poles removed from Loeben's saga, though he knew these
_MAerchen_,[95] for they were written when Brentano was his intimate
friend.

As to the importance of Loeben's saga, Wilhelm Hertz says: "Fast alle
jUengeren Dichter knUepfen an seinen Erfindungen an, so besonders die
zahlreichen musikdramatischen Bearbeitungen."[96] It is extremely
doubtful that this statement is correct. It is plain that many of the
lyric writers leaned on Schreiber, and the librettists could have done
the same; or they could have derived their initial suggestion in more
attractive form than that offered by Loeben. It seems, however, that
Geibel[97] knew Loeben's saga. Though his individual poems on the
Lorelei betray the influence of Heine, and though his drama resembles
Brentano's ballad in mood and in unimportant details, it contains the
same proper names of persons and places that are found in Loeben. And
what is more significant, it contains two important events that are
not found in any of the other versions of the saga: the scene with the
wine-growers and the story of the castaway ring. The latter is an old
theme, but that they both occur in Loeben and in Geibel would argue
that the latter took them from the former. It is largely a question as
to whether a poet like Geibel has to have a source for everything that
is not absolutely abstract. The entire matter is complicated.[98] The
paths of the Lorelei have crossed each other many times since Brentano
started her on her wanderings. To draw up a map of her complete
course, showing just who influenced whom, would be a task more
difficult than grateful.[99]

As to Brentano's original ballad,[100] try as we may to depreciate the
value of his creation by tracing it back to echo-poetry and by
coupling it with older legends, such as that of Frau Holla, we are
forced to give him credit for having not simply revived but for having
created a legend that is beautiful in itself and that has found a host
of imitators, direct and indirect, the world over, including one of
the world's greatest lyric writers. This then is just one of the many
things that the German romanticists started; it is just one of their
many contributions to the literature that lasts. And for the
perpetuation of this one, students of German literature have, it
seems, given the obscure Graf von Loeben entirely too much credit. But
who will give the oft-scolded Clemens Brentano too little credit? Only
those who dislike romanticism on general principles and who will not
be convinced that the romanticists could be original.[101]


                               ALLEN WILSON PORTERFIELD

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

NEW YORK CITY




FOOTNOTES:


[1] Ferdinand August Otto Heinrich Graf von Loeben, the scion of an
    old, aristocratic, Protestant family, was born at Dresden, August
    18, 1786. He received his first instruction from private
    tutors. For three years from 1804 on, he unsuccessfully, because
    unwillingly, studied law at the University of Wittenberg. In 1807
    he entered, to his profound delight, the University of Heidelberg,
    where, in association with Arnim, Brentano, and GOerres, he
    satisfied his longing for literature and art. Beginning with 1808
    he lived alternately at Wien, Dresden, and Berlin and with Fouque
    at Nennhausen.  He took an active part in the campaign of 1813-14,
    marched to Paris, and returned after his company had been
    disbanded, to Dresden, where, in 1817, he married Johanna Victoria
    Gottliebe _geb._ von Bressler and established there his
    permanent abode. In 1822 he suffered a stroke of apoplexy from
    which he never recovered: even the magnetic treatment given him by
    Justinus Kerner proved of no avail. He died at Dresden, April 3,
    1825. See _Allgemeine deutsche Biographie_, XIX, 40-45. The
    article is by Professor Muncker. Wilhelm MUeller also wrote an
    article full of lavish praise of Loeben in _Neuer Nekrolog der
    Deutschen_, III, Jahrg. 1824, Ilmenau, 1827.

[2] Meyer (6th ed.) does not mention Loeben even in the articles on
    Fouque and Malsburg, two of Loeben's best friends; Brockhaus
    (Jubilee ed.) mentions him as one of Eichendorff's friends in the
    article on Eichendorff, but neither has an independent note on
    Loeben. Nor is he mentioned in such compendious works on the
    nineteenth century as those by Gottschall, R.M. Meyer
    (_Grundriss_ and _Geschichte_), and Fr. Kummer. Biese
    says (_Deutsche Literaturgeschichte_, II. 436) of him: "Auch
    ein so ausgesprochenes Talent, wie es Graf von Loeben war, entging
    nicht der Gefahr, die Romantik in ihre Karikatur zu verzerren."

[3] Cf. _Allgemeine deutsche Biographie_, XIX, 42.

[4] Partial lists of his works are given in: Goedeke,
    _Grundriss_, VI, 108-10 (2nd ed.): _Allgemeine deutsche
    Biographie_, XIX. 40-45; the sole monograph on Loeben by
    Raimund Pissin. _Otto Heinrich Graf von Loeben, sein Leben und
    seine Werke_, Berlin, 1905, 326 pages.  By piecing these lists
    together--for they vary--it seems that Loeben wrote, aside from
    the works mentioned above, the following: 1 conventional drama, 1
    musical-romantic drama, 2 narrative poems, one of which is on
    Ferdusi, 3 collections of poems, between 30 and 40 novelettes,
    fairy tales and so on. and_ "einige tausend" aphorisms and
    detached thoughts. It is in Pissin's monograph that Loeben's
    position in the Heidelberg circle of 1807-8 is worked out. as
    follows: Loeben and Eichendorff constituted one branch, Arnim and
    Brentano the other, GOerres stood loosely between the two, and the
    others sided now with one group, now with the other.

[5] The verses are from _GestAendnisse_, No. 125 in Pissin's
   collection of Loeben's poems.

[6] _GestAendnisse_. No. 125.

[7] Aside from the reviews, letters, and individual poems reprinted
    here and there, the following works were accessible to the writer:
    (1) _Das weisse Ross, eine altdeutsche Familienchronik; (2) Die
    Sonnenkinder, eine ErzAehlung; (3) Die Perle und die Maiblume, eine
    Novelle; (4) Cephalus und Procris, ein Drama; (5) Ferdusi; (6)
    Persiens Ritter, eine ErzAehlung; (7) Die ZaubernAechte am Bosporus,
    ein romantisches Gedicht; (8) Prinz Floridio, ein MAerchen; (9)
    Leda; eine ErzAehlung; (10) WeinmAerchen; (11) GesAenge._

[8] Eichendorff's relation to Loeben can be studied in the edition of
    Eichendorff's works by Wilhelm Kusch, Regensburg. Vols. III,
    X-XIII have already appeared.  For a poetization of Loeben, see
    _Ahnung und Gegenwart_, chap. xii, pp. 144 ff. For a
    historical account of Loeben, see _Erlebtes_, chap. x,
    pp. 425 ff. It is here that Eichendorff makes Goethe praise Loeben
    in the foregoing fashion.

[9] There is no positive evidence that Goethe made any such remark. In
    his _GesprAeche_ (Biedermann. V, 270; VI, 198-99) there are
    two references to Loeben by Goethe; they are favorable but
    noncommittal as to his poetic ability.

[10] Cf. _Die TagebUecher des GrAefen von Platen_, Stuttgart, 1900.
    Under date of August 14, 1824, Platen wrote: "Es enthAelt viele
    gute Bemerkungen, wiewohl diese Art Prosa nicht nach meinem Sinne
    ist." The reference is to Loeben's commentary to Madame de Staels
    _De l'Allemayne._

[11] Cf. _Heinrick von Kleists Berliner KAempfe_, Berlin, 1901, pp.
    490-96. The story in question is "Die furchtbare Einladung."

[12] Cf. _Herm. Anders KrUeger, _Pseudoromantik. Friedrich Kind und der
    Dresdener Liederkreis._ Leipzig. 1904. pp. 144-48. KrUeger also
    discusses Loeben in his _Der junge Eichendorff._ Leipzig. 1904.
    pp. 88 and 128.

[13] Cf. Fouque, Apel. Miltitz. _BeitrAege zur Geschichte der deutschen
    Romantik_, Leipzig,1908. In a letter to his brother. Fouque wrote
    (January 6, 1813): "Ein Dichter, meine ich, ist er allerdings, ein
    von Gott dazu bestimmter." Fouque, however, realized Loeben's many
    weaknesses as a poet, though at Loeben's death he wrote a poem on
    him praising him as the master of verse technique.

[14] Cf. Kosch's edition of Eichendorff. XIII. 65. Loeben says: "In
    Weimar war ich im vorigen Winter bei Goethe; er war mir
    freundlich." The "previous winter" was 1813.

[15] Cf. Kosch's edition, XI, 220. The remark was made in 1807.

[16] Cf. Pissin. p. 25. The incident occurred in 1803 and Herder died
    in 1804.

[17] Cf. Kosch's edition, XI, 308. Lochen himself utterly condemned
    this work later. See Pissin, pp. 238-39, 267-08. Pissin gives the
    number of verse and strophe forms on p. 266.

[18] Cf. Pissin, p. 267. Uhland made the remark in 1812--his own most
    fruitful year as a poet.

[19] The story was published in 1817. The full title is _Das weisse
    Ross, eine altdeutsche Familienchronik in sechs und dreissig
    Bildern._ It is 160 pages long.

[20] An idea as to the lack of action in this story can be derived
    from the following statement by Otto (pp. 127-28), the brave hero:
    "Was man Schicksale zu nennen pflegt, habe ich wenige gehabt, aber
    erfahren habe ich dennoch viel und mehr als mancher durch seine
    glAenzenden Schicksale erfahren mag: nAemlich die FUehrungen der
    ewigen Liebe habe ich erfahren, die keinen verlAesst. und alles
    herrlich hinausfuhrt." And then Siegenot, the other hero, says
    that this is very true--whereupon they embrace each other.

[21] The story was first published In Urania: Taschenbuch fUer Damen
    auf das Jahr 1818. pp. 305-37.

[22] Aside from the poems in Pissin's collection in the _D.L.D. des
    18. u. 19. Jahr._, Ignaz Hub's _Deutschlands Balladen- und
    Romanzen-Dichter_, Karlsruhe, 1845, contains: (1) "Romanze von der
    weissen Rose," (2) "Der Tanz mit dem Tode," (3) "Der Bergknapp,"
    (4) "Das Schwanenlied." "Loreley" is also reprinted here, with
    modifications for the worse. "Schau', Schiffer, schau' nicht
    hinauf," is certainly not an improvement on Loeben's "Lieb Knabe,
    sieh' nicht hinauf,"

[23] The following are common forms: "Nez," "zwey," "versteken,"
    "SfAeren," "Saffo," "Stralenboten," "Abendrothen." "Uebermuth,"
    and so on, though the regular forms, except in the case of
    "Saffo," also occur.

[24] "Der Abend" reminds one strongly of HOelderlin's "Die Nacht,"
    while "Tag und Nacht" goes back undoubtedly to Novalis' "Hymnen an
    die Nacht," W. Schlegels sonnet on the sonnet stood sponsor for
    "Das Sonett," and Goethe and Tieck also reoccur in changed
    dress. The poems on Correggio (73), Ruisdael (75), Goethe (137),
    Tieck (138-39), and Novalis (141) sound especially like
    W. Schlegel's poems on other poets and artists.

[25] In his _Geschichte des Sonettes in der deutschen
    Dichtung_.'Leipzig, 1884. Heinrich Weltl (pp. 210-17) criticizes
    Loeben's sonnets most severely from the point of view of content;
    and as to their form he says: "Blos die Form, oder gar die blosse
    Form der Form ist beachtenswert." This is unquestionably a case of
    warping the truth in order to bring in a sort of pun.

[26]  The triolett is worth quoting as a type of Loeben's prettiness:

	  Galt es mir, das sUesse Blicken
	  Aus dem hellen Augenpaar?
	  Unter'm Netz vom goldnen Haar
	  Galt es mir das sUesse Blicken?
	  Einem sprach es von Gefahr,
	  Einen wollt' es licht umstricken;
	  Galt es mir, das sUesso Blicken
	  Aus dem hellen Augenpaar.

[27] An idea as to Loeben's temperament can he derived from the
    following passage in a letter to Tieck: "Gott sei mit Ihnen und
    die heilige Muse! Oft drAengt es mich, niederzuknien im Schein, den
    Albrecht DUerers und Novalis Glorie wirft, im alten frommen
    Dom. dann denk' ich Ihrer und ich lieg' an Ihrer Seele. Ich fUehle
    Sie in mir, wie man eine Gottheit fUehlt in geweihter
    Stunde. 'Liebe denkt in sel'gen TOenen, denn Gedanken stehn zu
    fern." The quotation should read "sUessen" instead of "sel'gen."
    See _Briefe an Tierk._ edited by Holtei, II, 266.

[28] As a corrective to the monographs of Pissin on Loeben and
    H. A. KrUeger on Eichendorff.  one should read Wilhelm Kosch's
    article in _Euphorion_ (1907, pp. 310-20). Kosch.  contends
    that Pissin and KrUeger have vastly overestimated Loeben's
    influence on Eichendorff, and that Loeben in general was "eine
    bedeutungslose Tageserscheinung."

[29] The complete title is _Godwi, oder das steinerne Bild der
    Mutter. Ein verwilderter Roman von Maria_. The very rare first
    edition of this novel, in two volumes, is in the Columbia
    Library. Friedrich Wilmans was the publisher.

[30] Cf. Alfred Kerr, _Godwi. Ein Kapitel deutscher
    Romantik_. Berlin, 1898, p. 2.

[31] Cf. Wilhelm Hertz, "UEber den Namen Lorelei," _Sitzungsberichte
    der k.b. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu MUenchen_, Jahrgang
    1886, pp. 217-51. For the etymologist, this is an invaluable
    study.

[32] The superficial similarity of those two poems can easily be
    exaggerated. The rhyme "sitzet-blitzet" is perfectly natural: the
    Lorelei had to be portrayed as "sitzen"; what is then easier than
    "blitzen"? In "Ritter Peter von Stauffenberg und die Meerfeye"
    (Des Knaben Wunderhorn, ed. of Eduard Grisebach, p. 277) we have
    this couplet:

	Er sieht ein schOenes Weib da sitzen.
	Von Gold und Silber herrlich blitzen.

    For more detailed illustrations, see below.

[33] It is worth while to note the actual date of Heine's composition
    of his ballad, since so eminent an authority as Wilhelm Scherer
    (_Ges. d. deut. Lit._, 8th ed., p. 662) says that Heine wrote the
    poem in 1824. And Eduard Thorn (_Heinrich Heines Beziehungen zu
    Clemens Brentano_, p. 90.) says that he published it in 1826.
    This is incorrect, as is also Thorn's statement, p. 88, that
    Brentano wrote his ballad in 1802. For the correct date of Heine's
    ballad, see _SAemtliche Werke_, Hamburg, 1865, XV, 200.]

[34] An instance of this is seen in _Selections from Heine's
    Poems_, edited by H.S. White, D.C. Heath & Co., Boston, 1900,
    p. 182. Professor White does, to be sure, refer to Strodtmann for
    the details; but Strodtmann does not prove anything. And in
    _Heines Werke in fUenfzehn Teilen_, edited by Hermann
    Friedeman, Helene Herrmann. Erwin Kaliseher. Raimund Pissin, and
    Veit Valentin, we have the comment by Helene Herrmann, who follows
    Pissin: "Die Loreleysage, erfunden von Clemens Brentano; vielfach
    von Romantikern gestaltet. Zwischen Brentanos Romanze und Heines
    Situationsbild steht die Behandlung durch den Grafen Loeben, einen
    unbedeutenden romantischen Dichter."

[35] The best finished collection of Heine's letters is the one by
    Hans Daffis, Berlin, 1907, 2 vols. This collection will, however,
    soon be superseded by _Heinrich Heines Briefwechsel_, edited
    by Friedrich Hirth, MUenchen and Berlin, 1914. The first volume
    covers Heine's life up to 1831. In neither of these collections is
    either Brentano or Loeben mentioned. There are 643 pages in
    Hirth's first volume.

[36] For a discussion of _Godwi_, see _Clemens Brentano: Ein
    Lebensbild_, by Johannes Baptista Diel and Wilhelm Kreiten,
    Freiburg i.B., 1877, two volumes in one, pp. 104-25.  As to the
    obscurity of Brentano's work, one sentence (p. 116) is
    significant: "_Godwi_ spukt heutzutage nur mehr in den KOepfen
    der liberalen Literaturgeschichtsschreiber, denen er einen
    willkommenen Vorwand an die Hand gibt, mit einigen stereotyp
    abgeschriebenen Phrasen den Stab Ueber den phantastischen,
    verschwommenen, unsittlichen u.s.w., u.s.w. Dichter zu brechen."

[37] _Clemens Brentano: Godwi oder das steinerne Bild der
    Mutter. Ein verwilderter.  Roman_. Herausgegeben und
    eingeleitet von Dr. Anselm Ruest, Berlin, 1906. Ruest edited the
    work because he thought it was worth reviving. In this edition,
    the ballad is on pages 507-10. Bartels (Handbuch, 2d ed., p. 400)
    lists a reprint in 1905, E.A.  Regener, Berlin.

[38] II, 391-93.

[39] For the various references, see Thorn's _Heinrich Heines
    Beziehungen zu Clemens Brentano_. pp. 88-90. His study is
    especially unsatisfactory in view of the fact that he says (p. 88)
    in this connection: "Wirklich Neues zu bringen ist uns nicht
    vergOennt, denn selbstverstAendlich haben die Forscher dieses
    dankbare und interessante Objekt schon in der eingehendsten Weise
    untersucht." And Thorn's attempt to show that Heine knew
    _Godwi_ early in life by pointing out similarities between
    poems in it and poems by Heine is about as untenable as argument
    could be, in view of the great number of poets who may have
    influenced Heine in these instances; Thorn himself lists (p. 63)
    BUerger, Fouque, Arnim, E.T.A. Hoffmann.

[40] In Pissin's collection of Loeben's poems (_D.L.D_., No. 135)
    we have a peculiar note.  After the ballad (_Anmerk._,
    p. 161), which Pissin entitles "Der Lurleifels," we read:
    "N.d. Hs." This would argue that Loeben did so entitle his ballad
    and that Pissin had access to the original MS. But then Pissin
    says: "Auch, die gleichnamige Novelle einleitend, in der
    _Urania_ auf 1821." But in _Urania_ the novelette is
    entitled "Eine Sage vom Rhein." and the ballad is entitled
    "Loreley." Bet him who can unravel this!

[41] For the entire story of the composition and publication of the
    _RheinmAerchen_, see _Die MAerchen von Clemens Brentano_,
    edited by Guido GOerres. 2 vols. in 1, Stuttgart, 1879 (2d ed.)
    This edition contains the preface to the original edition of 1840,
    pp. i-1.

[42] Thorn, who drew on M.R. Hewelcke's _Die Loreleisage_,
    Paderborn, 1908, makes (p. 90) this suggestion. It is impossible
    for the writer to see how Thorn can be so positive in regard to
    Brentano's influence on Heine. And one's faith is shaken by this
    sentence on the same page: "Brentano verOeffentlichte sein
    _Radlauf-MAerchen_ erst 1827, Heine 'Die Lorelei' schon 1826."
    Both of these dates are incorrect. Guido GOerres, who must be
    considered a final authority on this matter, says that, though
    Brentano tried to publish his _MAerchen_ as early as 1816,
    none of them were published until 1846, except extracts from "Das
    MyrtenfrAeulein," and a version of "Gockel," neither of which bears
    directly on the Lorelei-matter.

[43] Of GOerres' second edition, I, 250: "Nachdem Murmelthier herzlich
    fUer diese Geschenke gedankt hatte, sagte Frau Else: 'Nun, mein
    Kind! kAemme mir und Frau Lurley die Haare, wir wollen die deinigen
    dann auch kAemmen'--dann gab sie ihr einen goldnen Kamm, und
    Murmelthier kAemmte Beiden die Haare und flocht sie so schOen, dass
    die Wasserfrauen sehr zufrieden mit ihr waren."

[44] In _H. Heines Leben und Werke_. Hamburg, 1884 (3d ed.),
    Bd. I. p. 363. In the notes, Strodtmann reprints Loeben's ballad,
    pp. 696-97. His statement is especially unsatisfactory in view of
    the fact that he refers to the "fast gleicher Inhalt," though the
    essentials of Heine's ballad are not in Loeben's, and to
    "einegewisse AEhnlichkeit in Form," though the similarity in form
    is most pronounced.

[45] In _Allgemeine deut. Biog_., XIX. 44. It is interesting to
    see how Professor Muncker lays stress on this matter by placing in
    parentheses the statement: "Einige ZUege der letzten Geschichte
    ["Sage vom Rhein"] regten Heine zu seinem bekannten Liede an."

[46] In _Dichtungen von Heinrich Heine, ausgewAehlt und
    erlAeutert_, Bonn, 1887, p. 326.  Hessel's Statement is
    peculiarly unsatisfactory, since he says (p. 309) that he is going
    to the sources of Heine's poems, and then, after reprinting
    Loeben's ballad, he says: "Dieses Lied war Heines nAechstes
    Vorbild. AusfUehrlicheres bei Strodtmann, Bd. I, S. 362."  And this
    edition has been well received.

[47] In _Grundriss, VI, 110. Again we read in parentheses: "Aus
    diesem Liede und dem EingAenge der ErzAehlung schOepfte H. Heine sein
    Lied von der Loreley."

[48] In _Ges. d. deut. Lit_., p. 662 (8th ed.).

[49] In _Heinrich Heines Beziehungen zum deutschen Mittelalter_,
    Berlin, 1908, pp., 94-95.  MUecke is the most cautious of the ten
    authorities above listed; and he anticipated Walzel in his
    reference to Schreiber's _Handbuch_.

[50] In _Ueber den Namen Lorelei, p. 224. Hertz is about as cautious
    as Strodtmann; "Es ist kaum zu bezweifeln dass," etc.

[51] In _SAemtliche Werke_, I, 491.

[52] In _HauptstrOemungen_. VI, 178. Brandes says: "Der Gegenstand
    ist der gleiche, das Versmass ist dasselbe, ja die Reimen sind an
    einzelnen Stellen die gleichen: blitzetsitzet; statt 'an-gethan'
    steht da nur 'Kahn-gethan.'"

[53] In _Der deutschen Romantiker_, Leipzig, 1903, p. 235.

[54] In _Deutsches Literatur-Lexikon_, MUenchen, 1914, p. 271. It
    is significant that KrUeger makes this statement, for the subtitle
    of his book Is "Biographisches und bibliographisches Handbuch mit
    MotivUebersichten und Quellennachweisen." And it is, on the whole,
    an extremely useful book.

[55] It is impossible to see how Brandes can lay great stress on the
    fact that this rhyme occurs in both poems. The following rhymes
    are found on the following pages of the Elster edition, Vol. I, of
    Heine's works: "Spitze-Blitze" (36), "sitzen-nUetzen" (116),
    "Witzen-nUetzen" (124), "sitzen-blitzen" (216),
    "erhitzet-bespitzet" (242), "Blitz-Sitz" (257), "blitzt-gestUetzt"
    (276), "blitze-besitze" (319), "blitzet-gespitzet" (464).  And in
    Loeben's poems the rhyme is equally common. The first strophe of
    his _Ferdusi_ runs as follows:

	Hell erglAenzt an Persiens Throne
	Wo der grosse Mahmud sitzt;
	Welch Juwel ist's, das die Krone
	So vor allen schOen umblitzt.

    And in Schreiber's saga we have in juxtaposition, the
    words. "Blitze" and "Spitze."  The rhyme "Sitze-Blitze" occurs in
    Immanuel's "Lorelei," quoted by Seeliger, p. 31.

[56] There are, to be sure, only 114 words in Loeben's ballad if we
    count "um's," "dir's," and "glaub's" as three words and not six.

[57] These numbers are in the Columbia Library.

[58] During these years Heine's letters are dated from GOettingen,
    Berlin, Gnesen, Berlin, MUenster, Berlin, LUeneburg, Hamtburg,
    RitzenbUettel, and LUeneburg. During these same years Loeben was in
    Dresden and he was ill.

[59] We need only to mention such a strophe as the following from
    _Atta Troll_:

	Klang das nicht wie JugendtrAeume.
	Die ich trAeumte mit Chamisso
	Und Brentano und Fouque
	In den blauen MondscheinnAechten?

    See Elster edition, II, 421. The lines were written in 1843.

[60] The first edition of Karl Simrock's _Rheinsagen_ came out in
    1836. This was not accessible. The edition of 1837, "zweite,
    vermehrte Auflage," contains 168 poems, 572 pages; this contains
    Simrock's "Ballade von der Lorelei." The edition of 1841 also
    contains Simrock's "Der Teufel und die Lorelei." The book contains
    455 pages, 218 poems. The sixth edition (1809) contains 231 poems.
    In all editions the poems are arranged in geographical order from
    SUedersee to GraubUenden. Alexander Kaufmann's _Quellenangaben und
    Bemerkungen zu Kart Simrocks Rheinsagen_ throws no new light on
    the Lorelei-legend.

[61] Cf. _Heinrich Heines sAemtliche Werke_, edited by Walzel,
    FrAenkel, KrAehe, Leitzmann, and Peterson. Leipzig. 1911, II,
    408. So far as I have looked into the matter, Walzel stands alone
    in this belief, though MUecke, as has been pointed out above,
    anticipated him in the statement that Heine drew on Schreiber in
    this case. But MUecke thinks that Heine also knew Loeben.

[62] The reference in question reads as follows: "Ich will kein Wort
    verlieren Ueber den Wert dieses unverdaulichen Machwerkes [_Les
    Burgraves_], das mit allen mOeglichen PrAetensionen auftritt,
    namentlich mit historischen, obgleich alles Wissen Victor Hugos
    Ueber Zeit und Ort, wo sein StUeck spielt, lediglich aus der
    franzOesischen Uebersetzung von Schreibers _Handbuch fUer
    Rheinreisende_ geschOepft, ist." This was written March 20, 1843
    (see Elster edition, VI. 344).

[63] Aloys Wilhelm Schreiber (1763-1840) was a teacher in the Lyceum
    at Baden-Baden (1800-1802), professor of aesthetics at Heidelberg
    (1802-13) where he was intimate with the Voss family,
    historiographer at Karlsruhe (1813-26), and in 1826 he retired and
    became a most prolific writer. He interested himself in guidebooks
    for travelers. His manuals contain maps, distances, expense
    accounts, historical sketches, in short, about what the modern
    _Baedeker_ contains with fewer statistics and more popular
    description.  His books appeared in German, French, and
    English. In 1812 he published his _Handbuch fUer Reisende am
    Rhein von Schaffhausen bis Holland_, to give only a small part
    of the wordy title, and in 1818 he brought out a second, enlarged
    edition of the same work with an appendix containing 17
    _Volkssagen aus den Gegenden am Rhein und am Taunus_, the
    sixteenth of which is entitled "Die Jungfrau auf dem Lurley." His
    books were exceedingly popular in their day and are still
    obtainable. Of the one here in question, Von Weech
    (_Allgem. deut. Biog._, XXXII, 471) says: "Sein _Handbuch
    fUer Reisende am Rhein_, dessen Anhang eine wertvolle Sammlung
    rheinischer Volkssagen enthAelt, war lange der beliebteste FUehrer
    auf Rheinreisen." There are 7 volumes of his manuals in the New
    York Public Library, and one, _Traditions populaires du
    Rhin,_ Heidelberg, 1830 (2d ed.), is in the Columbia
    Library. It contains 144 legends and beautiful engravings. (The
    writer has just [October 15, 1915] secured the four Volumes of
    Schreiber's _Rheinische Geschichten und Sagen_. The fourth
    volume, published in 1830. is now a very rare book.)

[64] The remainder of Schreiher's plot is as follows: The news of the
    infatuated hero's death so grieved the old Count that ho
    determined to have the Lorelei captured, dead or alive. One of his
    captains, aided by a number of brave followers, set out on the
    hazardous expedition. First, they surround the rock on which the
    Lorelei sits, and. then three of the most courageous ascend to her
    seat and determine to kill her, so that the danger of her
    repealing her former deed maybe forever averted. But when they
    reach her and she hoars what they intend to do, she simply smiles
    and invokes the aid of her Father, who immediately sends two white
    horses--two white waves--up the Rhine, and. after leaping down to
    the Rhine, she is safely carried away by these. She was never
    again seen, but her voice was frequently heard as she mocked, in
    echo, the songs of the sailors on her paternal stream.

[65] It is not simply in the appendix of Schreiber's _Handbuch_
    that he discusses the legend of Lorelei, but also in the
    scientific part of it. Concerning the Lorelei rock he says
    (pp. 174-75): "Ein wunderbarer Fels schiebt sich jetzt dem
    Schiffer gleichsam in seine Bahn--es ist der Lurley (von Lure,
    Lauter, und Ley, Schiefer) aus welchem ein Echo den Zuruf der
    Vorbeifahrendem fUenfzehnmal wiederholt. Diesen Schieferfels
    bewohnte in grauen Zeiten eine Undine, welche die Schiffenden
    durch ihr Zurufen ins Verderben lockte."

[66] Brockhaus says (p. xxiv): "Die einfache Sage von den beiden
    feindlichen BrUedern am Rhein, van denen die TrUemmer ihrer BUergen
    selbst noch _Die BrUeder_ heissen ist in A. Schreiber's
    Auswahl von Sagen jener Gegenden zu lesen." Usener's tragedy is
    published In full in this number of _Urania_, pp. 383-442.

[67] Cf. Elster edition, IV, 406-9. The circumstantial way in which
    Heine retells this story is almost sufficient to lead one to
    believe that he had Schreiber at hand when he wrote this part of
    Elementargeister; but he says that he did not.

[68] Discussion as to the first conception of Heine's _Rabbi_ are
    found in: _Heinrich Heines Fragment_; _Der Rabbi von Bacharach_,
    by Lion Feuchtwanger, MUenchen, 1907; _Heinrich Heine und Der Rabbi
    von Bacharach_, by Gustav Karpeles, Wien, 1895.

[69] The poem is one of the _Junge Leiden_, published in 1821, Elster
    (I, 490) says: "Eine bekannte Sage, mit einzelnen vielfach
    wiederkehrenden uralten ZUegen, dargestellt In Simrocks
    _Rheinsagen_." Simrock had, of course, done nothing on the
    _Rheinsagen_ in 1821, being then only nineteen years old and an
    inconspicuous student at Bonn. Walzel says (I. 449.): "Mit einem
    andern Ausgang ist die Sage in dem von Heine vielbenutzten
    _Handbuch fUer Reisende am Rhein_ von Aloys Schreiber (Heidelberg,
    1816) Ueberliefert."  The edition of this work in the New York
    Public Library has no printed date, but 1818 is written in. Walzel
    may be correct. The outcome of Heine's poem is, after all, not so
    different: In Schreiber, both brothers relinquish their clalms to
    the girl and remain unmarried; in Heine the one kills the other
    and in this way neither wins the girl.

[70] It is the same story as the one told by Bulwer-Lytton in his
    _Pilgrims of the Rhine_.  chap. xxiv.

[71] All through the body of Schreiber's _Handbuch_, there are
    references to the places and legends mentioned in Heine's
    _Rabbi_. On Bacharach there is the following: "Der Reisende,
    wenn er auch nur eine Stunde in Bacharach verweilt, unterlasse
    nicht, die Ruinen von Staleck zu besteigen, wo eine der schOensten
    Rheinlandschaften sich von seinen Blicken aufrollt. Die Burg von
    sehr betrAechtlichem Umfang scheint, auf den TrUemmern eines
    ROemerkastells erbaut. Die, welche die Entstehung derselben den
    Hunnen zuschreiben, well sie in Urkunden den Namen Stalekum hat,
    sind in einem Irrtum befangen, denn Stalekum oder Stalek heisst
    eben so viel als StalbUehl, oder ein Ort, wo ein Gericht gehegt
    wurde. Pfalzgraf Hermann von Staleck, starb im 12ten Jahrhundert;
    er war der letzte seines Stammes, und von ihm kam die Burg, als
    KOelnisches Lehen, an Konrad Von Staufen."

[72] To come back to Heine and Loeben, Herm. Anders KrUeger says (p.,
    147) in his _Pseudoromantik:_ "Heinrich Heine, der Ueberhaupt
    Loeben studiert zu haben scheint," etc. He offers no proof. If one
    wished to make out a case for Loeben, it could bo done with his
    narrative poem "Ferdusi" (1817) and Heine's "Der Dichter Ferdusi."
    Both tell about the same story; but each tells a story that was
    familiar in romantic circles.

[73] In reply to a letter addressed to Professor Elster on October 4,
    1914, the writer received the following most kind reply on
    November 23: "Die Frage, die Sie an mich richten ist leicht
    beantwortet: Heine hat Loeben in seinen Schriften nicht erwAehnt,
    aber das besagt nicht viel; er hat manchen benutzt, den er nicht
    nennt. Und es kann _gar keinem Zweifel unterliegen_, dass
    Loeben fUer die Lorelei Heines _unmittelbares_ Vorbild ist;
    darauf habe ich Oefter hingewiesen, aber wohl auch andere. Das
    Taschenbuch _Urania_ fUer das Jahr 1821, wo Loebens Gedicht
    u. Novelle zuerst erschienen, ist unserem Dichter zweifellos zu
    Gesicht gekommen." No one can view Professor Elster in any other
    light than as an eminent authority on Heine, but his certainty
    here must be accepted with reserve, and his "wohl auch andere" is,
    in view of the fact that, he was by no means the first, and
    certainly not the last, to make this assertion, a trifle
    disconcerting.

[74] The ultimate determining of sources is an ungrateful theme. Some
    excellent suggestions on this subject are offered by Hans Rohl in
    his _Die Aeltere Romantik und die Kunst des jungen Goethe_,
    Berlin, 1909, pp. 70-72. This work was written under the general
    leadership of Professor Elster. The disciple would, in this case,
    hardly agree with the master. Pissin likewise speaks wisely in
    discussing the influence of Novalis on Loeben in his monograph on
    the latter, pp. 97-98. and 129-30. And Heine himself (Elster
    edition, V. 294) says in regard to the question whether Hegel did
    borrow so much from Schelling: "Nichts ist lAecherlicher als das
    reklamierte Eigentumsrecht an Ideen."  He then shows how the ideas
    were not original with Schelling either; he had them from
    Spinoza. And it is just so here. Brentano started the legend;
    Heine goes back to him indirectly. Eichenidorff and Vogt directly;
    Schreiber borrowed from Vogt, Loeben from Schreiber, and Heine
    from Schreiber--and thereafter it would be impossible to say who
    borrowed from whom.

[75] The majority of the _Loreleidichtungen_ can be found in:
    _Opern-Handbuch_, by Hugo Riemann, Leipzig, 1886: _Zur
    Geschichte der MAerchenoper_, by Leopold Schmidt, Halle, 1895;
    _Die Loreleysage in Dichtung und Musik_, by Hermann Seeliger,
    Leipzig, 1898.  Seeliger took the majority of his titles from
    _Nassau in seinen Sagen, Geschichten und Liedern_, by
    Henniger, Wiesbaden, 1845. At least he says so, but one is
    inclined to doubt the statement, for "die meisten Balladen" have
    been written since 1845. Seeliger's book is on the whole
    unsatisfactory. He has, for example, Schreiber improving on, and
    remodeling Loeben's saga; but Schreiber was twenty-three years
    older than Loeben, and wrote his saga at least three years before
    Loeben wrote his.

[76] In F. GrAeter's _Idunna und Hermode, eine Alterthumszeitung_,
    Breslau, 1812, pp.  191-92, GrAeter gives under the heading, "Die
    Bildergallerie des Rheins." thirty well-known German sagas. The
    twenty-seventh is "Der Lureley: Ein GegenstUeck zu der Fabel von
    der Echo." It is the version of Vogt.

[77] Aside from the above, some of the less important authors of
    lyrics, ballads, dramas, novels, etc., on the Lorelei-theme are:
    J. Bartholdi, H. Bender, H. Berg, J. P. Berger, A. H. Bernard,
    G. Conrad, C. Doll, L. Elchrodt, O. Fiebach, Fr. FOerster,
    W. Fournier, G. Freudenberg, W. Freudenberg, W. Genth, K. Geib,
    H. Grieben, H. GrUeneberg, G.  Gurski, Henriette Heinze-Berg,
    A. Henniger, H. Hersch, Mary Koch, Wilhelmine Lorenz, I. Mappes,
    W. Molitor, Fr. MUecke, O. W. Notzsch, Luise Otto, E. RUeffer, Max
    Schaffroth, Luise Frelin von Sell, E. A. W. Siboni, H. Steinheuer,
    Adelheid von Stolterfoth, A.  Storm, W. von WaldbrUehl, L. Werft,
    and others even more obscure than these.

[78] In Menco Stern's _Geschichten vom Rhein_, the story is told
    so as to connect the legend of the Lorelei with the treasures of
    the _Nibelungenlied_. In this way we have gold in the
    mountain, wine around it, a beautiful woman on it--what more could
    mortal wish? Sympathy! And this the Lorelei gives him in the
    echo. In reply to an inquiry, Mr. Stern very kindly wrote as
    follows: "The facts given in my _Geschichten vom Rhein_ are
    all well known to German students; and especially those mentioned
    in my chapter 'Lorelay' can bo verified in the book: _Der
    Rhein_ von Philipp F. W. Oertel (W. O. v.  Horn) who was, I
    think, the greatest authority on the subject of the Rhine." Oertel
    is not an authority. In Eduard-Prokosch's _German for
    Beginners_, the version of Schreiber was used, as is evident
    from the lines spoken by the Lorelei to her Father:

	Vater, Vater, geschwind, geschwind.
	Die weissen Rosse schick' deinem Kind,
	Es will reiten auf Wogen und Wind.

    These verses are worked into a large number of the ballads, and
    since they are Schreiber's own material, his saga must have had
    great general influence.

[79] There would be no point in listing all of the books on the
    legends of the Rhine that treat the story of the Lorelei. Three,
    however, are important, since it is interesting to see how their
    compilers were not satisfied with one version of the story, but
    included, as becomes evident on reading them, the versions of
    Brentano, Schreiber, Loeben, and Heine: _Der Rhein: Geschichten
    und Sagen_, by W. O. von Horn, Stuttgart, 1866, pp.  207-11;
    _Legends of the Rhine_, by H. A. Guerber, New York, 1907, pp:
    199-206; _Eine Sammlung von Rhein-Sagen_, by A. Hermann
    Bernard, Wiesbaden, no year, pp. 225-37.

[80] Mrs. Caroline M. Sawyer wrote a poem entitled "The Lady of
    Lorlei. A Legend of the Rhine." It is published in _The female
    Poets of America_, by Rufus Wilmot Griswold, New York, 1873,
    p. 221. This is not the first edition of this work, nor is it the
    original edition of Mrs. Sawyer's ballad. It is an excellent
    poem. Fr. Hoebel set it to music, and Adolf Strodtmann translated
    it into German, because of its excellence, and included it in his
    _Amerikanische Anthologie_. It was impossible to determine
    just when Mrs. Sawyer wrote her poem. The writer is deeply
    indebted to Professor W. B. Cairns, of the department of English
    in the University of Wisconsin, who located the poem for him.

[81] Cf. _Otto Ludwigs gesammelte Schriften_, edited by Adolf
    Stern, Leipzig, 1801, I.  69, 107, 114.

[82] It has been impossible to determine just when Sucher (1789-1860)
    set Heine's ballad to music, but since he was professor of music
    at the University of TUebingen from 1817 on, and since he became
    interested in music while quite young, it is safe to assume that
    he wrote his music for "Die Lorelei" soon after its
    publication. The question is of some importance by way of finding
    out just when the ballad began to be popular.  Strangely enough,
    there is nothing on Silcher in Hobert Eitner's compendious
    _Quellen-Lexicon der Musiker und Musikgelehrten der christlichen
    Zeitrechnung_, Leipzig, 1900-1904.  Heine's ballad is included
    in the _Allgemeines deutsches Commersbuch unter musikalischer
    Redaktion von Fr. Silcher und Fr. Erck_, Strassburg, 1858 (17th
    ed.), but the date of composition is not given.

[83] In _Pauls Grundriss der germanischen Philologie_, I, 1039,
    Mogk says: "Die Weiblichen Nixen bezaubern durch ihren Gesang, die
    Loreley und Aehnliche Sagen mOegen hierin ihre Wurzel haben." The
    only trouble is, no one has thus far unearthed this saga.

[84] Wilhelm Hertz gives (pp.229-30) instances of this so that
    uncertainty as to its accuracy is removed. The passages are
    striking in that they concern the "Lorberg" and the "Lorleberg."

[85] In chap, XV Eichendorff introduces the ballad as follows:
    "Leontin, der wenig darauf achtgab, begann folgendes Lied Ueber ein
    am Rheine bekanntes MAerchen." The reference can be only to
    Brentano, despite the fact that the first two lines are so
    strongly reminiscent of Goethe's "Erlkonig." Eichendorff and
    Brentano became acquainted in Heidelberg and then in Berlin they
    were intimate. There is every reason to believe that Eichendorff
    knew Bretano's "RheinmAerchen" in manuscript form. For the relation
    of the two, see the Kosch edition of Eichendorff's
    works. _Briefe_ and _TagebUecher,_ Vols. XI-XIII.

[86] Niklas Vogt included, to be sure, in his _Jugendphantasien Ueher
    die Sagen des Rheins_ (_ca._ 1811) an amplified
    recapitulation in prose of Brentano's ballad. Schreiber knew this
    work, for in his _Handbuch_ there is a bibliography of no
    fewer than ten pages of "Schriften, welche auf die Rheingegend
    Bezug haben." So far as one can determine such a matter from mere
    titles, the only one of these that could have helped him in the
    composition of his Lorelei-saga is: _Rheinische Geschichten und
    Sagen_, von Niklas Vogt.  Frankfurt am Main, 1817, 6 BAende.

[87] Eduard Thorn says (p. 89): "Man darf annehmen, dass Heine die
    Ballade Brentano's kennen gelernt hat, dass er aus ihr den Namen
    entlehnte, wobei ihm Eichendorff die Fassung 'Lorelei' lieferte,
    und das ihm erst Loebens Auffassung der Sage zur Gestaltung
    verhelfen hat." It sounds like a case of _ceterum censeo_,
    but Thorn's argument as to Brentano and Heine is so thin that this
    statement too can be looked upon only as a weakly supported
    hypothesis.

[88] Cf. Raimund Pissin's monograph, pp. 73-74.

[89] There are about two thousand words in Schreiber's saga, and about
    five thousand in Loeben's.

[90] It must be remembered that Schreiber's manuals are written in an
    attractive style: his purpose was not simply to instruct, but to
    entertain. And it was not simply the legends of the Rhine and its
    tributaries, but those of the whole of Western Germany that he
    wrote up with this end in view.

[91] Some minor details that Loeben, or Heine, had he known the
    _MAerchen_ in 1823, could have used are pointed out in Wilhelm
    Hertz's article, pp. 220-21.

[92] Cf. GOerres' edition, pp. 94-108.

[93] Cf. _ibid_., pp. 128-40, and 228-44. It is in this
    _MAerchen_ (p. 231) that Herzeleid sings Goethe's "Wer nie
    sein Brod in ThrAenon asz."

[94] Cf. GOerres' edition, pp. 247-57. There are a number of details in
    this _MAerchen_ that remind strongly of Fouque's _Undine_,
    which Brentano knew.

[95] In his _Die MAerchen Clemens Brentanos_, KOeln, 1895,
    H. Cardauns gives an admirable study of Brentano's _MAerchen_,
    covering the entire ground concerning the question whether
    Brentano's ballad was original and pointing out the sources and
    the value of his, _RheinmAerchen_. Cardauns comes to the only
    conclusion that can be reached: Brentano located his ballad in a
    region replete with legends, but there is no positive evidence
    that he did not wholly invent his own ballad. The story that
    Hermann Bender tells about having found an old MS dating back to
    the year 1650 and containing the essentials of Brentano's ballad
    collapses, for this MS cannot be produced, not even by Bender who
    claims to have found it. See Cardauns, pp. 60-67. Reinhold Steig
    reviewed Cardauns' book in _Euphorion_ (1896, pp. 791-99)
    without taking in the question as to the originality of Brentano's
    ballad.

[96] P. 224.

[97] In Geibel's _Gesammelte Werke_, VI. 106-74, Geibel wrote the
    libretto for Felix Mendelssohn in 1846. Mendelssohn died before
    finishing it; Max Bruch completed the opera independently in
    1863. It has also been set to music by two obscure composers. Karl
    Goedeke gives a very unsatisfactory discussion of the matter in
    _Emanuel Geibel_, Stuttgart, 1860. pp. 307 ff.


[98] Hermann Seeliger says (p. 73): "Zu den Bearbeitungen, die sich an
    die Ballade von Brentano anlehnen, gehOeren die Dichtungen von
    Geibel, Mohr, Roquette, Hillemacher, Fiebach und Sommer." Seeliger
    wrote his study for musicians, and his statement may be correct.

[99] Aside from the treatises on the Lorelei already mentioned, there
    are the following: _Zu Heines Balladen und Romanzen_, by
    Oskar Netoliczka, Kronstadt, 1891; this study does not treat the
    Lorelei; _Die Lurleisage_, by F. Rehorn, Frankfurt am Main,
    1891; _Sagen und Geschichten des Rheinlandes_, by Karl Geib,
    Mannheim, 1836; the work is naturally long since superseded;
    _KOelnische Zeitung_ of July 12, 1867, by H. Grieben;
    _KOelnische Zeitung_ of 1855, by H. DUentzer; _H. Heine, ein
    Vortrag_, by H. Sintenis, pp.  21-26; _Die Lorelei: Die
    Loreleidichtungen mit besonderer RUecksicht auf die Ballade von
    Heinr. Heine_, by C. L. Leimbach, WolfenbUettel, 1879. The last
    six of these works were not accessible, but, since they are quoted
    by the accessible studies, it seems that they offer nothing
    new. (The writer has since secured Leimbach's treatise of 50 small
    pages. It offers nothing new.)

[100] Adolf Seybert in his _Die Loreleisage_, Wiesbaden, 1863 and
    1872 (Programm), contends that Frau Holla and the Lorelei are
    related. Fritz Strich in his _Die Mythologie in der deutschen
    Literatur von Klopstock bis Wagner_, Halle, 1910, says
    (pp. 307-9) that Brentano's ballad is "eine mythologische
    Erfindung Brentanos, zu der ihn der echoreiche Felsen dieses
    Namens bei Bacharach anregte." He also says: "Ob nicht Heines Lied
    auf Brentanos Phantasie zurUeckgewirkt haben mag?" The reference is
    to Brentano's _MAerchen_. Strich's book contains a detailed
    account of the use of mythology in Heine, Loeben, and Brentano.

[101] Hermann Seeliger says (p. 8): "Ich meine, die ganze romantische
    Schule hAette ohne den Stoff vom Volke zu bekommen, ein Gedicht von
    solcher SchOenheit wie das von Brentano weder gemacht noch machen
    kOennen." Vis-a-vis such a statement, sociability ceases.







***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRAF VON LOEBEN AND THE LEGEND OF
LORELEI***


******* This file should be named 11066.txt or 11066.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/0/6/11066


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
